doc: add ADR for dependencies in package.json (#3730)
Talend/ui: docs/adr-dependencies.md

# usage of Dependencies, peerDependencies, devDependencies in package.json

## Context

Dependencies are specified using the package.json of libraries.
We have more and more libraries written and used by projects.

We use different distribution format for our libraries:

- UMD for some (react-components, react-cmf, etc ...)
- mix of transpiled js and sass files which need shared config to make it work for others

## Problems

We see commits with mix of peerDependencies and dependencies without real guidelines.

> Each change in peerDependencies lead to a major release.

Author: breaking change means project has to do a change. If a library change a peerDependencies it means user (project) have to do change. Even minor.

> Each change in peerDependencies lead to a major release.

Reviewer: > If a library change a peerDependencies it means user (project) have to do change.
If a library's peerDep implements a bugfix, the user of that library doesn't have to change anything. You do get a warning, but there's no actual *need* for the host project to change at this point. 
That's the whole benefit of semver too: if any minor change is as pressing as a major one, then they are all major.

It would be very paralysing to keep enforcing this IMO.

> Each change in peerDependencies lead to a major release.

Author: https://github.com/semver/semver/issues/502 this has been discussed here

We do not know when to put a dependencies in `"peerDependencies"` or just in `"dependencies"` attribute of the package.json

> With yarn peerDependencies are hard to manage. It just does a warning the first time , when it needs to really install it in your node_modules. So it is easy to forget it. We have also seen some false positive warnings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With yarn, `peerDependencies` are hard to manage. Yarn only outputs a warning the first time it encounters the dependency, when it needs to really install it in your node_modules. It's easy to miss and to forget. We have also seen some false positive warnings.
```

> With npm it depends the version, the behavior change:
> 
> - npm 1,2,7,8 install peerDependencies
> - npm 3,4,5,6 do not install peerDependencies
> 
> The documentation of npm only cover the behavior of npm note the definition and usage of theses.
> 
> We know our project can't use npm > 7.0 because we have some issues in our peerDependencies definitions ! That need to be fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With npm, peerDependency management depends on the version used:

- npm 1,2,7,8 install peerDependencies
- npm 3,4,5,6 do not install peerDependencies

The documentation of npm only covers the behavior of npm, not the definition and actual usage of these peer dependencies.

We know our project can't use npm > 7.0 because we have some issues in our peerDependencies definitions! 
npm > 7 requires all peer dependencies to be at the same level, the same version. That needs to be fixed on our end.
```

IIRC that's the issue with npm > 7. It refuses to install multiple versions of peer dependancies. It's also a bitch because it's not shallow: it will also complain if your regular dependencies have shared peer dependencies that are not all at the same level.

## Solutions

> Define a clear guideline and usage of when and how to write the requirements in package.json of libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define a clear guideline for dependency requirements in the package.json files of libraries.
```

### Guideline

**`"devDependencies"`**

> Add **a-dependency** under devDependencies if **a-dependency** is used only to build, debug, or because A is also a peerDependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add **a-dependency** under `devDependencies` if **a-dependency** is used only to build, debug, or because A is also a peerDependencies.

Basically use `devDependencies` if this dependency has no impact on runtime.
```

> because A is also a peerDependencies

I don't understand this part!

Author: If you put react in peerDependency, you have also to put it in devDependencies or it will no be installed by many package manager (yarn, npm 3 to 6)

examples:

- @talend/scripts-core
- @talend/scripts-preset-react-lib
- i18next-scanner
- cross-env
- react (if in peerDependencies)

> The case of **@types/some-js-library**: only if your exported types do not depends on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type dependencies (usually in the format `@types/some-js-library`) can be added to `devDependencies` only if the exported types for the library you're working on do not depend on it.

(code)
import { LibType } from 'some-js-library';

// If this export is available in the bundle, then your bundle has an actual dependency to LibType
export myLibType = LibType & { isActive: boolean };
(code)

```

**`"dependencies"`**

> Add **a-dependency** under dependencies only if it is used by the code and do not fall under peerDependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add **a-dependency** under `dependencies` only if it is used by the code and does not fall under peerDependencies.
```

examples:

- @talend/design-token
- @talend/router-bridge
- @talend/react-components
- @talend/react-containers
- @talend/react-datagrid
- @talend/react-dataviz
- classnames
- keycode
- lodash
- prop-types
- date-fns
- react-bootstrap

> The case of **@types/some-js-library**: only if your exported types depends on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we've discussed, add type files to dependencies if your exported types depends on it.
```

**`"peerDependencies"`**

> Add **a-dependency** under peerDependencies only if it is has to be installed and configured (so imported) into the project code to make your library working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add **a-dependency** under peerDependencies only if it is has to be installed and configured (so imported) into the project's code to make your library work.
```
Why? 

Also you will import the stuff from `dependency` just the same?

```
import tokens from '@talend/desing-tokens';
import { ButtonPrimary } from '@talend/design-system';
import { Grid } from `@talend/datagrid';
```

Locally as a dev, all three need to be available (installed) for my project to run.

Reviewer: Maybe a better explanation would be: 

> Add a dependency to your library's `peerDependencies` if ticks any of those boxes: 
> - It requires a very specific version of that dependency to run (discouraged)
> - The consumer will *need* to import or configure something out of that dependency in order to make your library work (ex: `i18next` is used in my library, the host project will need to configure it for the library to run)

> # usage of Dependencies, peerDependencies, devDependencies in package.json

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Usage of dependencies, peerDependencies, devDependencies in package.json
```

## Context

> Dependencies are specified using the package.json file in library repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dependencies are specified using the package.json file in the library's codebase.
```

We have more and more libraries written and used by projects.

We use different distribution formats for our libraries:

- UMD for some (react-components, react-cmf, etc ...)

> - mix of transpiled JS and SASS files which need shared config to make it work for others

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a mix of transpiled JS and SASS files which needs sharing config to make it work for others
```

## Problems

We see commits with a mix of libraries being added to `peerDependencies` and `dependencies` without real guidelines.

> Each change in peerDependencies lead to a major release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each change in peerDependencies leads to [a major release](https://github.com/semver/semver/issues/502).
```

> We do not know when to put a dependency in the `"peerDependencies"` or just in the `"dependencies"` attribute of the package.json file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We do not know when to put a dependency in the `"peerDependencies"` or just in the `"dependencies"` of the package.json file.
```

With yarn, `peerDependencies` are hard to manage. Yarn only outputs a warning the first time it encounters the dependency, when it needs to really install it in your node_modules. It's easy to miss and to forget. We have also seen some false positive warnings.

> With npm, peerDependency management depends on the version used:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With npm, peerDependencies management depends on the version used:
```

- npm 1,2,7,8 install peerDependencies
- npm 3,4,5,6 do not install peerDependencies

The documentation of npm only covers the behavior of npm, not the definition and actual usage of these peer dependencies.

> We know our project can't use npm > 7.0 because we have some issues in our peerDependencies definitions! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We know our projects can't use npm > 7.0 because we have some issues in our peerDependencies definitions! 
```

npm > 7 requires all peer dependencies to be at the same level, the same version. That needs to be fixed on our end.

## Solutions

Define a clear guideline for dependency requirements in the package.json files of libraries.

### Guideline

**`"devDependencies"`**

Add **a-dependency** under `devDependencies` if **a-dependency** is used only to build, debug, or because A is also a peerDependencies.

Basically use `devDependencies` if this dependency has no impact on runtime.

> examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examples:
```

- @talend/scripts-core
- @talend/scripts-preset-react-lib
- i18next-scanner
- cross-env
- react (if in peerDependencies)

Type dependencies (usually in the format `@types/some-js-library`) can be added to `devDependencies` only if the exported types for the library you're working on do not depend on it.

> (code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

Reviewer: Haha that's where the suggestion feature fails, but these (code) things should be three backticks

> Type dependencies (usually in the format `@types/some-js-library`) can be added to `devDependencies` only if the exported types for the library you're working on do not depend on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Types dependencies (usually in the format `@types/some-js-library`) can be added to `devDependencies` only if the exported types for the library you're working on do not depend on it.
```

> ```javascript
> import { LibType } from 'some-js-library';
> 
> // If this export is available in the bundle, then your bundle has an actual dependency to LibType
> export myLibType = LibType & { isActive: boolean };
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```typescript
import { LibType } from 'some-js-library';

// If this export is available in the bundle, then your bundle has an actual dependency to LibType
export type myLibType = LibType & { isActive: boolean };
```
```

**`"dependencies"`**

Add **a-dependency** under `dependencies` only if it is used by the code and does not fall under peerDependencies.

> examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examples:
```

> - @talend/design-token

Reviewer 2: See my last comment 
```suggestion
```

- @talend/router-bridge
- @talend/react-components
- @talend/react-containers
- @talend/react-datagrid
- @talend/react-dataviz
- classnames
- keycode
- lodash
- prop-types
- date-fns
- react-bootstrap

> As we've discussed, add type files to dependencies if your exported types depends on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we've discussed, add types dependencies if your exported types depend on them.
```

**`"peerDependencies"`**

> Add **a-dependency** under peerDependencies only if the consumer will need to import or configure something out of that dependency in order to make your library work (ex: i18next is used in my library, the host project will need to configure it for the library to run)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add **a-dependency** under peerDependencies only if the consumer will need to import or configure something out of that dependency, to make your library work (ex: i18next is used in my library, the host project will need to configure it for the library to run)
```

> At the [begining in 2013](https://nodejs.org/en/blog/npm/peer-dependencies/) the peerDependencies as heen created to cover the Plugin needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the [begining of 2013](https://nodejs.org/en/blog/npm/peer-dependencies/) the peerDependencies have been created to cover the Plugin needs.
```

> So **a-dependency** can be added even if your library do not use it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So **a-dependency** can be added even if your library does not use it.
```

> examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examples:
```

> - @talend/design-system

Reviewer 2: Actually, what's truthy for DS, will be true for Design Tokens, I guess
```suggestion
- @talend/design-tokens
- @talend/design-system
```

Reviewer: Nope, you don't need to configure anything from `design-tokens` package for it to work. It's a straightforward dependency.
